Pull docs (#420)
rocicorp/replicache: doc/docs/server-pull.md

---
title: Pull Endpoint
slug: /server-pull
---

The pull endpoint is used when doing a [`pull`](api/classes/replicache#pull).

> The purpose of the server pull endpoint is to send the client view to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of the server pull endpoint is to send the Client View to the
```

Reviewer: And then link "Client View" to: https://doc.replicache.dev/how-it-works#%E2%91%A0-pull, which is the closest we have to a conceptual overview of pull.

> client. The client view is the view of the data that the client should see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client.
```

The conceptual/overview doc should explain concepts. The reference should just be a reference. See also: https://diataxis.fr/

called when a request returns an HTTP `401 Unauthorized` and can be used to show
a login screen or request a new auth token as needed.

### `X-Replicache-RequestID`

The request ID is useful for debugging. It is of the form
`<clientid>-<sessionid>-<request count>`. The request count enables one to find
the request following or preceeding a given request. The sessionid scopes the
request count, ensuring the request id is probabilistically unique across
restarts (which is good enough).

This header is useful when looking at logs to get a sense of how a client got to
its current state.

## HTTP Request Body

When pulling we `POST` an HTTP request with a JSON encoded body.

```ts
type PullRequestBody = {
  clientID: string;
  cookie: JSONValue;
  lastMutationID: number;
  pullVersion: number;
  schemaVersion: string;
};
```

### `clientID`

The [`clientID`](api/classes/replicache#clientid) for this instance of
Replicache. Each web browser and instance of Replicache gets a unique client ID
keyed by the [`name`](api/interfaces/replicacheoptions#name).

### `cookie`

The cookie that was received last time a pull was done. `null` if this is the first time we do a pull.

> <!-- TODO: Is this null the first time or is the property missing? -->

Reviewer: It's `null`

### `lastMutationID`

> When doing a pull this is the ID of th last mutation that was applied to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last mutation ID that has been applied to the client.
```

> When doing a pull this is the ID of th last mutation that was applied to the client.

Reviewer: @phritz why do we send `lastMutationID` in pull? What are servers expected to do with it?

### `pullVersion`

This is the version number describing the type Replicache uses for the response
JSON. The current version is `0`.

### `schemaVersion`

This is something that you control and should identify the schema of your client
view. This ensures that you are sending data of the correct type so that the
client can correctly handle the data.

## HTTP Response

### HTTP Response Body

The response body is a JSON object of the [`PullResponse`](api#pullresponse) type:

```ts
type PullResponse = {
  cookie: JSONValue;
  lastMutationID: number;
  patch: PatchOperation[];
};
```

### `cookie`

The `cookie` is something that the backend completely controls. It gets sent to
the client in the pull response and gets sent back to the server in the next
pull request. Its main usecase is to allow the backend to efficiently compute
the diff between pull requests.

The cookie can be any [`JSONValue`](api#jsonvalue) but just like with HTTP cookies
you want to limit its size since it get sent on every request.

For more information on different strategies on how to use the cookie check out

> the [Cookie Monster Manual](#TODO)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Computing Changes for Pull](https://roamresearch.com/#/app/aboodman/page/CRCQyTopz).
```

Reviewer: We can turn this into real doc later, but better than nothing for now.

### `lastMutationID`

This is the ID of the last mutation that was successfully applied to from
client. See [push](#TODO) for more details.

### `patch`

> Conceptually Replicache is a string-key-json-value database. The data in

Reviewer: Again, let's keep this just reference and save the explanation to overview docs. So reduce these paras to something like:

> Describes how to update the Client View to the current state. See (same cookie monster link) for more information.

Replicache that a client has access to locally is called the client view.

Instead of sending the whole client view on every pull request you can send a
patch that describes how to update the client view. This is the delta between
the last pull and now. This is where you can you use the [`cookie`](#cookie-1) to
compute the minimal delta.

> The [`patch`](api#patchoperation) supports 3 operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`patch`](api#patchoperation) supports three operations:
```

```ts
type PatchOperation =
  | {
      op: 'put';
      key: string;
      value: JSONValue;
    }
  | {op: 'del'; key: string}
  | {op: 'clear'};
```

#### `put`

Puts a key value into the data store. The `key` is a `string` and the `value` is
any [`JSONValue`](api#jsonvalue).

#### `del`

Removes a key from the data store. The `key` is a `string`.

#### `clear`

Removes all the data from the client view. Basically replacing the client view
with an empty map.

> This one is useful in case the cookie is missing or there was an error with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful in case the cookie is missing or not recognized by the server
```

> cookie, in which place it makes sense to send all the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cookie, in which case it makes sense to send all the data. It's also useful when prototyping, to avoid having to compute patches at all.
```
